So we're all turning the wheel of Dharma, the three wheels of study, contemplation, and practice.
Beautiful. When thinking about just as we begin any practice, of course, we're always going
to be beginning with, reconnecting with our pure motivation. And here too, with our pure
motivation of Dharma practice, Dharma contemplation, Dharma study, we're connecting with these
three motivations, our renunciation, our Bodhichitta, our pure perception. So again, we hear this
again and again and again. And the point is, in one voice from all of our great root teachers,
Mr. and Paul Dinshera, all in one voice, all the way to the pure, primordial Buddha's motivation
is pure. And by connecting with these three motivations, with our joy, our appreciation,
but more contentment, more appreciation, less fixation, more contentment, we're able to
just be, right? And that's the essence of our hinyana, or foundational practices. Really
connecting with the pure motivation of our Bodhichitta, that our practice can truly be
of benefit for countless sentient beings, that through actualizing our vast aspirations
of Bodhichitta, we can actually become the sources of refuge and benefit for all beings
to find their own peace. And then through that, the vast connecting with our devotion
and trust with the purity of all innate, in all phenomena, the innate goodness qualities
of our own mind and heart, as well as every living being and all phenomena arising. That's
the essence of our Vajrayana practice. And so we're beginning with this vital instructions,
because that's the whole path. That's the whole practice where with each stage, even
though we have these stages in our practice of like good in the beginning, good in the
middle, good in the end, it means we're not leaving anything behind. We're touching home
base. We're settling into our joy, our appreciation, vast Bodhichitta, open, trusting, you know,
devotion and pure perception as best we can with that purity aspect of things. That's
the essence of the path. That's the whole path. That's all the whole ninyanas in being
practiced in one drop, you know. And then as we progress and continue with our study, our
contemplation, our practice, it's only becoming more and more rich, but these are the three
vital ingredients. And then kind of along with that, I just thought to remind myself
and all of us too of, you know, wisdom is so vital to the practice, right, seeing things
as they are. And so as we sit down to practice or do anything in the day, again, in that
same kind of tone, the ideal is we're touching home base with our practice, not as an in
an escape or a escape room, you know, but more as like connecting what's always present.
And of course, really central in the Buddhist teachings is the great awareness of great
emptiness. So, you know, often I think we don't necessarily have it in our nundra practice,
but in many of the sadhanas we practice, we have this really famous mantra, home, swabhava,
shuddha, sarva, dharma, sobhava, shudho, hang. So you may or may not remember some of that.
But the point is, that's really essential view in the teachings, that again, as we start
our practice, as we continue our practice remaining in an open way, connecting with
this view of what? Of the great emptiness, the openness of our situation, that we are
like Rinpoche say, connecting with the transcendental wisdom rainbow body of our experience.
Nothing
is fixed. Nothing is solid. Nothing is permanent, independent, you know, everything is open,
really connecting. So oh, again, this is the point of this is remembering this basic view
we're trying to not only hold, but establish with our meditation, support with our conduct,
and eventually we have the fruit, right? So ohm, swabhava, shuddha, sarva, dharma, sobhava,
shudho, hang. Of course, Sanskrit language is so profound, there's no one meaning to
these mantras, but some things we can connect with conceptually here and release into the
great ocean are, you know, ohm is just again, like auspiciousness of all that is appearing.
And swabhava is kind of like self nature. Shuddha means purity, you know, the purity
of the true nature that doesn't have any fabrication or kind of contrivedness just from beginning
less
time, the self nature is always present and open. Sarva, dharma is, you know, all Sarva
is all dharma, all phenomena, all phenomena is open, empty, of being solid, independent,
permanent. Swabhava, shuddho, hang, you know, we're doing to maintain our connection with
the nature of innate purity, the openness of our situation. So we start with, right, the
difference in the teachings between fully realized Buddha and ordinary being is the
degree to which we recognize that purity nature, that open nature, that brilliant sizzling
wisdom nature, omniscient love, compassion, wisdom. So remembering in our practice, we're
not trying to be calm or be something we're not, we're just trying to really connect with
how things are and dispel, you know, what's untrue, dispel our wrong views. So I guess
without getting too wordy here, the point here is when we're beginning our practice
to just really as much as we can connect with that view of openness, emptiness, or in some
ways like recognizing the dream of our experience, because again, the emptiness nature, clearly
the Buddha pointed isn't a void state, a dull state, a negation state. It's beyond existing,
not existing both, neither. And our path is to connect with that. And so something I think
we all can relate to is if it is our dreams themselves, you know, recognizing this is
a dream. In the big sense, of course, we have our dreams at night. And maybe if I'm sure
everyone to some degree has had the experience of while we're sleeping in a dream sleep dream,
recognizing it was a dream to some degree. And that's something very independent and
personal and but what does our mind do with that when that happens, you know? And similarly,
in this bardo of this life, of which our dreams are another bardo, the Buddha says, right,
like dreams, firings, clouds, do bubbles, magical displays. Thus, we should view all
compounded things, all phenomena. So when we're beginning our practice, just sitting
in that open question, recognizing this is a dream. Yes, we're all always, no matter
what, no matter how painful and obscured our experience, or no matter which level of the
boomies were on or the paths, always and forever beyond the three times our experience is insepar
able
from this purity primordial openness nature of our own mind. And so in some ways, we don't
have to worry, oh, I'm not enlightened, or like, oh, I'm like feeling really anxious,
or whatever, or so just as we start our practice, just being however we connect, recognizing
this is a dream, this is open, this is my own mind. We each are the sovereigns of our
own experience. You know, like we say in another one of our refuge prayers and our bodhicitta
prayers, you know, samsara and nirvana are the same. It's our perspective that makes
the difference. Therefore, we're expand and connect with our bodhicitta that's pervading
all our experiences. And so even at the beginning of our practice, we're starting with connecting
with that openness. That again, isn't a blank state, but just recognizing even if we're
recognizing Oh, this is a dream. This is my mind. This is timeless. Emptiness shining forth
as my this reality of this moment. That's part of this connecting with the five perfections
in our devotion, you know, this is the perfect place, perfect time, perfect teacher, perfect
teachings, perfect assembly, to recognize the always and forever Dharma of wisdom, compassion,
power, love, that's always pervading, no matter what our experience. And again, not to deny
how we're feeling, but sometimes, you know, it can help us kind of just get a little breath
and openness to our situation recognizing that. You know, like, I think Kompopa says in one
of his great treatises, that's showing the whole path, you know, the nature, nature of
samsara is samsara is what miracle of not knowing how things are, right? Ignorance, attachment,
awareness. So as we, the nature of samsara is empty and open. And its quality is confusion
and challenge and suffering. The nature of samsara, I mean, the s the nature of nirvana
is also emptiness. But its quality is freedom from suffering, openness, omniscience, wisdom,
peace. So just having those little views, or even as we're doing the visualization,
I think not disassociating or thinking our current experience is wrong in a moral sense.
We've had wrong view, right, of that things, I'm solid, I exist, you know, there's things
that can help me and things that can hurt me and all that. Really briefly, crudely said.
But what we're feeling, what we're feeling if we can just remember that this is all based
in the great, our own great, vast nature. And even though we might be like little babes
in the brambles, we have the great support of like the living buddhas who have fully
recognized that nature, and who effortlessly, indestructibly, naturally, uncontrived are
always shining and displaying to bring us, you know, support to recognize that nature.
Or as we're visualizing ourselves as yashe sojal and doing our guru yoga with Guru Padma
Sambava. Of course, the visualization is wonderful and really helps us to recognize, to kind
of get out of our habitual pattern of our fixed idea of what's possible. But at the
same time, we don't want to be pushing away our current perceptions as well. Just kind
of gently remembering that it's all purity. It's all empty. And the point of our practice
is we're gradually becoming more and more familiar with think how things are more and
more. Sorry, I'm just going to look at my notes. More and more familiar with how things
are until we have that. And our nundro practice itself, like I mentioned at the beginning,
it is the foundation practices for our zokchen, for the great perfection. That means it's
setting the stage with our nundro practice, are all the foundations for recognizing this
emptiness awareness that's, again, beyond extremes. Again, recognizing the dream, recognizing
the dreamer, looking to the looker, resting in that place, not rejecting our current experience
for what it's not, and not fixating or grasping and contracting into what we think it is,
but kind of this middle way approach. That mind is beyond all extremes of how we composite
things are, just resting in that openness. So realizing the great perfection, and then
these foundation practices we're doing, just are helping us to deepen our realization of
that. And so again, all these five main sections of our nundro, from the very beginning, we're
starting with remembering this great openness awareness, even though we may not have this
mantra I mentioned at the beginning, just even from the very beginning, home, our emptiness
awareness, the true face of the lama, through all the unfoldings and meanings of the seven
line prayer, reflecting on the four thoughts, again, remembering the lama, reflecting on
the four thoughts that turn the mind towards the dharma, towards what's true and reliable,
which is the essence of taking refuge in the three jewels, the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha,
in the three roots, the Guru, the Yiddam, Dakini, in the three aspects of true nature
of our own mind, the three caayas, the Dharmakaya, Sambhogakaya, Nermanakaya. Again, we're taking
refuge in the Buddha, the three jewels, the three roots, all embodied as Guru Padmasambhava,
as the embodiment of all the fully awakened ones. But also inherently, it's also that
we have the deep trust in our own innate goodness, in nature qualities. And we're just beyond
duality mingling with recognizing our true nature.
Again, before this great realization of wisdom and openness, awareness, emptiness, awareness,
we connect with our bodhicitta motivation. We try to actualize that again through what?
By accumulating our merit, which always begins with the activity of kindling all the fire
of activating the accumulation of merit, which is essentially a generous heart that's aware
of great openness and emptiness and dedicating courageously everything towards the realization
of nature. And then in our Vajrasattva practice, recognizing, you know, purifying our mistaken
and twisted view and our mistaken and troublesome meditation and our really unsatisfying conduct,
be it from just not recognizing we haven't fully recognized the dream or along with that
any ways that we've kind of acted against what we know is better. But the essence here
is like purifying, realigning with right view, right meditation, right conduct. So I hope
I'm not confusing people here. I was just saying, we always have a view and we always
have our doing things that can help uphold that view and make it seem, you know, see
how it's more, you know, strength in that view and conduct that holds that up. So here
by wrong view, I'm meaning the wrong view that we're solid, independent, permanent,
not wrong view. And all the ways in which we help to support that with our hopes and
fears and actions done out of hope and fear and ignorance that creates what? Samsara.
But no, here we're recognizing that mistake and purifying through the four powers and
connecting with the right view of openness, bodhicitta, continuing with our, you know,
again what we truly mean on the path of Dharma with right view, meditation that upholds the
view of recognizing the openness of our mind, conduct of accumulating merit that creates
more and more circumstances on the relative level for us to bring about that peace and
harmony and balance and realization of wisdom, whose fruit is again, moving through the paths
and boomies all the way to Buddhahood for the benefit of all beings. And then again,
purifying, I mean, purifying yes, but then the supreme blessings of the guru yoga of
again mingling our mind with the essence of all the fully enlightened ones of all time
and space embodied as guru Padma Sambhava, inseparable from the root teachers of this
life, inseparable from the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, inseparable from, you know, the guru
Deva Dakini, fully realized through Kaya and mingling ourselves with that with again the
great support of guru Padma Sambhava and our root teacher, their instructions, taking them
to heart is what we're trying to do. Like we say in our prayers, again, from that very
first home of emptiness awareness through even in the guru yoga, you know, at the end
of guru yoga, what do we do? We have that prayer, guru, Lama, embodiment of all the
Buddhas of the three times, please be aware of me in this and future lives and in the
Bardo and these three, hold me with your compassion. Bless me ceaselessly throughout the three
times,
you know, making that deep connection again, no matter what our current perception, keeping
that beautiful connection. And then again, even at the very end of our practice, we're
connecting with the true nature, the great perfection and the Lama, right? deity mantra
and Dharma Kaya are the nature of all appearance, sound and awareness, the pervasive Kaya and
wisdom display of the Buddhas. You know, may we practitioners of the profound and secret
great perfection, we students on the path, we babes, you know, maybe we remain inseparable
from the innermost one taste awareness of wisdom mind in our own direct experience,
but also kind of remembering inseparable from the Lama. So maybe I've had enough banter,
but let's do the practice. Remembering great openness, great awareness as we go, connecting
with our joy, our devotion, our bodhicitta, recognizing this dream as a dream, looking
to the dreamer, and then engaging, you know, again, with with the view, meditation, conduct.
So we'll just do seven line prayer, and then we'll go to the the Noondrow.